The development of Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) will take place when Women are part of the political system and given the same opportunities as men. This is not only true in the DRC but elsewhere. Women make up 53 percent of the Congolese population and 67 percent of the electorate. Yet, Women are barely present in the political system, in education and far less in the workforce. Jeffrey Sachs, a prominent political economist once said, “a country that blocks women from fully participating in economic and political life is running on half its brain power and talents”.  For decades, women have been dehumanized by violence and kept in poverty by the system of oppression in the DRC. One particular way, DRC can make progress in development is changing its attitude towards young girls and allowing them to participate in education.

In DRC, women are allowed to work and apply to various positions of their choice. However, opportunities are limited in comparison to men. This is particularly because of gender discrimination and the educational gap between woman and men. Women are underrepresented in the workforce and earn less than their male counter-parts in the same jobs. Furthermore, in many parts of the Congo, women are illegally denied pensions and the right of inherence. The presence of gender discrimination undermines the role of women in the society. These gender-based discriminations exist because of the lack of women in the political system and the limited opportunities in the DRC.

The Congolese legislation protects women’s political rights under the law. Thus, women are given space to participate equally as men in the elections and run for local or national level political offices. Sadly, this is not manifested in provincial parliaments, and evidently the presence of women in the political system continues to be slim. A study conducted by Peacewomen showed that the proportion of female parliamentarians in Kinshasa was (17 %); followed by the southern province of Katanga (13 %). The Provinces with the least proportion of female parliamentarians were the Bas Congo (8 %), Kasaï Occidental (7.5 %), Kasaï Oriental (5 %), Equateur (5 %) and the eastern province of South Kivu (3 %). This is not a coincidence that the numbers are low. The educational attainment for women remains low and political careers are still perceived as men’s jobs. The culture must shift from gender-based sectors and establish a sagacity of freedom for women to choose what they want and dream big. Allow young girls to grow up and envision a future where they can be anything. Early marriages should become taboo and not normalized.

In rural area, it is estimated that 74% of women between the age of 15 and 19 are married.  This is alarming! Not only do early marriages reinforce the poverty cycle, the lack of human capital increases. These women are exposed into sexual relationship at early age and become mothers as teenagers. Of course education is not the only key factor for change in the Congo. One must consider the history, culture and the current atmosphere of the Country. The country has been unstable for decades, the GDP per capita has been decreasing and the political arena has not been steady. The civil wars and civil unrests have made the country dangerous and women and children are eventual victims. The Congo is currently ranked among the most dangerous countries for women. The focus for peace must be an integral policy among Congolese people and their government.

All Congolese should be against tribalism, xenophobia and gender-based discrimination. The country belongs to them and the fight for peace must be exemplified among themselves. The political economy of the country should be transparent and carefully designed for the benefit of the country and the people. Corruption must be fought at all levels and good governance must prevail. In addition, the government institutions should be accountable and the bureaucracy should be strengthened. The education system must be reengineered and customized to the present. The government should provide decent healthcare and educational opportunities, especially for young girls. The developmental progress of Congo will not take place until women are seen as equals, capable and vibrant members of the society. After all, Congolese women have been significantly contributing to the survival of their families and the whole DRC nation. Imagine what they can do if they are provided with the same opportunities as men in the peaceful Congo.

*Benjamin Itangishaka, originally from Sud Kivu in Democratic Republic of Congo, studied Political Science and Sociology at the University of Northern Colorado for undergraduate where he focused on multicultural social issues and politics in developing countries. He is currently pursuing a M.S. in Global Affairs at New York University, with a concentration in international development and humanitarian assistance.*
